[MUSIC]
For this exercise, the CFO of the airline
has identified two major values that will
need to be calculated in the future
to better understand rates and
adjust to a changing business environment.
One, the cost per mile for
each aircraft in dollars.
Two, the total revenue for
each flight, assuming that there is now
an additional 10% tax on all fares.
With a few simple Excel formulas,
we can leverage existing fields in
our tables to address these changes.
Let's start with the first
question where we are being asked,
which aircraft has the highest
fuel cost per mile?
In order to answer this question we're
going to start by creating a field that
will calculate the total cost per mile for
each aircraft.
If we look in the aircraft data table.
We see that we have the fuel cost
per seat per mile in column D.
But this only gives us a cost for
a seat and not for the entire aircraft.
However, the aircraft table
also provides a seat capacity
of each aircraft in column C.
If we combine information
in these two columns,
we'll be able to calculate the total fuel
cost per mile for all of the aircrafts.
We must also consider the fact that the
fuel cost per mile is measured in cents,
which is expected due to its low value.
However, we're going to want to show
the total cost per aircraft in dollars,
since cents aren't a standard measure.
To do this we'll need to take the total
cost in cents and divide that by 100.
Since there are 100 cents in each dollar.
Assuming that each flight is full, we can
calculate the fuel costs per mile by
multiplying fuel costs per seat per mile
by the seat capacity of the airplane, and
then dividing that value by 100
to get the total cost in dollars.
We're going to be using a Calculated
Field to perform this calculation, and
then we'll use this field
as input to a pivot table
which will give us the analysis
we're looking for.
So let's get started.
We're going to start by
creating the Calculated Field
by navigating to the PowerPivot tab and
selecting Manage.
Within the Data View section,
there is an option that allows us to
select the data table that we want
to add the Calculated Field to.
The values we want to use
are both in the aircraft table.
So let's go ahead and
select AircraftPivot from the list.
There is an add column option on the right
side which contains a formula bar that can
be used to input the calculations similar
to how regular formulas work in Excel.
So let's go ahead and click on the formula
bar to start editing the formula.
Remember, we want to multiply
the SeatCapacity field
by the FuelCostperSeatMile field.
And then we need to divide this by 100
in order to get a value in dollars
instead of cents.
So we're going to type equals and
we'll select the SeatCapacity field
which populates in our formula.
Next we input multiply and
select the FuelCostperSeatMile field.
Now we just need to add division by
100 and we are done with our formula.
Next, we need to provide a new name for
the new field.
Let's call it FuelCostPerMile(Dollars),
since it's consistent with
the naming of the other fields.
We're almost done with
creating the Calculated Field.
All that remains is making sure
the field is formatted correctly.
To do this,
let's navigate to the formatting tab.
And select Decrease Decimal,
which allows us to adjust
the Calculated Field to two decimals.
Now that we have created the new field
which calculates the total fuel cost per
mile for each aircraft we are going
to create a Pivot Table using
this data to determine which aircraft
has the highest fuel cost per mile.
Let's create our Pivot Table in a separate
tab, just like we did for exercise two.
So let's head to the tab named Pivot 3A.
We want to place the Pivot Table
in the top left corner, so
let's select cell A1 before navigating
to the PowerPivot tab on the ribbon.
Here we select the Pivot Table option.
Brings up a pop-up window where we're going
to select the existing worksheet for
the location of the table.
And then we click OK to create the table.
Next, we're going to drag our new
Calculated Fields into the values section
which provides us with a total sum of
the cost across all aircraft types.
We want to know the cost for
individual airlines, so
let's drag the aircraft type into
the rows section of the Pivot Table.
Since we want to know which aircraft
has the highest fuel cost per mile,
we're going to right-click
on the Pivot Table, and
select sort from largest
to smallest in the menu.
We can now see that the B737 aircraft
has the highest fuel cost per mile,
among the aircrafts flown by our company.
Let's go back to the exercise three
tab and put that answer into cell G13.
As part of the next
question in exercise 3,
we're being asked to determine which
flights have the highest total revenue.
If we look at the Flights table,
we notice that we have the total fare for
each flight in column H.
We are going to create a new Calculated
Field that allows us to calculate
the total revenue by applying a 10% tax to
the total fares collected for each flight.
So let's head back to the exercise
three tab and let's get started.
Just like before, we start by
navigating to the PowerPivot Tab,
and selecting Manage.
Within the data view section,
there's a list of available data tables.
Since we want to calculate the total
revenue based on the total fares that can
be found in the Flights table,
we're going to select
FlightsPivot from the list.
Next, we're clicking the formula
bar on the right side of the window
to start entering our formula.
Remember, the total revenue is going to be
equal to the total fares minus a 10% tax.
Hence, we are going to multiply
the total fare by 0.9.
So let's type equals and
then we select the total fare field
which populates in our formula.
Next we add multiple type .9 and
press enter to close the formula.
Then we are going to name
this new field Total Revenue.
Now that we have created
our Calculated Field,
which provides us with
the total revenue per flight,
taking into account of the 10% new tax,
we are going to create a pivot using this
data in order to determine which
flights have the highest total revenue.
We're going to create our pivot
table in a separate tab again, so
let's head to the tab named Pivot 3B.
We want to place the pivot
table in the top left corner,
so let's select cell A1 before navigating
to the PowerPivot tab on the ribbon.
Here we select the Pivot Table option.
Which brings up a pop-up window
where we're going to select Existing
Worksheet for the location of the table
and then we click OK to create the table.
Next we're going to drag the Total Revenue
Field into the value section which
provides us with a total sum of
all revenue across all flights.
But we want to know the total revenue
on a flight-by-flight basis, so
let's drag the Flight ID into
the row section of our pivot table.
As you can see this produces
a large list of flights and
their corresponding revenues.
We want to see which flight
has the largest revenue.
So let's right click
on the pivot table and
select Sort From Largest
to Smallest in the menu.
We can now see that there are 4 flights
that all have the highest revenue.
So let's go ahead and copy these values.
Next, we're going to navigate
back to the Exercise 3 tab, and
we're going to paste our
answer into cell G17.
The final question in Exercise 3 asks
us to provide a visual representation of
the revenue distribution
across all flights.
This chart is going to rely on the Total
Revenue Field that we just created.
So we don't need to create
a new Calculated Field.
Instead of using this data
to create a pivot table,
we are going to use it
to create a pivot chart.
So let's get started.
First, similar to what we
did with the pivot tables,
we are going to center the cell that
we would like to place our chart in.
Here, we have been provided
with the chart area.
Next, we navigate to the Power-
Pivot tab on the ribbon.
Select the PivotChart option.
We are going to drive the flight
attribute into our access section.
And the total revenue attribute
into a value section,
since we are using this field
as a value of measurement.
The chart that we just created provides us
with a basic view of the various revenue
levels across flights.
To sort this from largest to smallest,
select the drop-down in the bottom
left corner that says Flight ID.
And select More Sort
Options from the menu.
This brings up a pop-up window that
allows us to sort the data in the chart.
Select Descending Z to A.
And pick Sum of
Total Revenue from the list.
Click OK to confirm.
Finally, we are going to change
the name of the chart by selecting
the placeholder text, and
replacing it with Total Revenue by
Flight. We can now see that
there are a few flights
with very high total revenue amounts with
a significant drop-off after this level.
In this section, we learn how to create
and store Calculated Fields in PowerPivot and
then use these new fields to create
PowerPivots, and PowerCharts.
Now it's your turn to practice what you
just learned in the student workbook.
[MUSIC]